.TH COATL 1 "June 2026" "Coatl" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
coatl \- compile Coatl sources to native Linux binaries, assembly, or IR
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B coatl
.I input.coatl\fR|\fIinput.ir
[\fB-o\fR \fIoutput\fR]
[\fB--arch=\fRx86_64|aarch64]
.br
.B coatl
[\fB--version\fR|\fB-V\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B coatl
is the Coatl compiler, implemented as a single Rust crate. It lexes and parses
a \fI.coatl\fR source file into an S-expression intermediate representation (IR),
lowers the IR to native assembly, and (by default) assembles and links the result
into a native Linux ELF binary using the system C compiler.
.PP
A \fI.ir\fR file may be given as input instead, in which case the Coatl front end
is skipped and the IR is read directly.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I input.coatl | input.ir
The input file. A \fI.coatl\fR file is compiled from source; a \fI.ir\fR file is
parsed directly as IR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-o\fR \fIoutput\fR
Write output to the given path. The output kind is inferred from the extension:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB.s\fR \(em assembly source for the selected architecture
.IP \(bu 2
\fB.ir\fR \(em textual S-expression IR
.IP \(bu 2
any other extension \(em assembled and linked native ELF binary
.RE
If \fB-o\fR is omitted, the generated assembly is written to standard output.
.TP
\fB--arch=\fRx86_64|aarch64
Select the target architecture. Default is \fBx86_64\fR.
.TP
\fB--version\fR, \fB-V\fR
Print the compiler version and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CC
The C compiler/linker used for the final assemble-and-link step. Default is \fBcc\fR.
When \fB--arch=aarch64\fR is selected on a non-ARM64 host, \fBaarch64-linux-gnu-gcc\fR
is used for linking when available.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success and non-zero on error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fBcoatl examples/hello.coatl -o /tmp/hello\fR
Compile to a native binary.
.TP
\fBcoatl examples/hello.coatl -o /tmp/hello.s\fR
Emit x86_64 assembly.
.TP
\fBcoatl examples/hello.coatl -o /tmp/hello.ir\fR
Emit textual IR.
.TP
\fBcoatl examples/hello.coatl --arch=aarch64 -o /tmp/hello_arm\fR
Cross-compile to an AArch64 binary.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project wiki:
.br
.B https://github.com/euxaristia/Coatl/wiki
